# PROJECT TITLE: SALES DATA AND CUSTOMER ANALYSIS AND VISUALIZATION USING EXCEL, SQL SERVER, AND POWER BI


## TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. *[Project Overview](#project-overview)*
2. *[Data Description](#data-description)*
3. *[Data Cleaning and Preparation](#data-cleaning-and-preparation)*
4. *[Exploratory Data Analysis](#exploratory-data-analysis)*
5. *[Data Analysis](#data-analysis)*


## Project Overview
---

The Sales and Customer Data Analysis and Visualization project aims to uncover valuable insights from LITA Capstone sales and customer data to inform business decisions, optimize sales strategies, and enhance customer engagement.
Imagine having a really clear view of your sales landscape, knowing exactly which products are flying off the shelves, which customers are loyal patrons, and where your next big sales opportunity lies.
Our quest is to dig dip into the sales and customer data of LITA Capstone, uncovering trends, patterns, and insights that drive business growth. This project presents the results of the LITA Capstone sales and customer analysis to understand the underlying issues and to propose actionable recommendations.

## Statements

### Problem Statement

Currently, LITA Capstone Sales and Customer data is fragmented, making it difficult to understand product category performance, regional sales trends, and high value customer behavior. How then can we integrate and analyze LITA Capstone Sales and Customwr data to inform business?

### Solution Statement

Design and deploy sales and customer data integration and analytics solution to provide actionable insights, enabling informed decision making and driving business growth.

### Objectives

The primary objective of this analysis are:
   - Summarize total sales by product, region, and month using pivot tables.
   - Identify products with no sales.
   - Calculate monthly sales for the current year.
   - Identify the top performing product.
   - Calculate the average subscription duration.
   - Identify the most popular subscription types.


## Data Description
---

### Data Sources

The primary source of data used in this analysis is the LITA Capstone Sales data, and the LITA Capstone Customer data. Provided in an Excel file format, covering sales transaction from January 2023 to August 2024 and customers subscriptions from January 2022 to January 2024.

### Tools Used

   - For Data Cleaning, Analysis, and Visualization - Microsoft Excel [Download Here](https://www.microsoft.com)
   - For Data Querying and Manipulation - SQL download server [Download Here](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/sql-server/sql-server-downloads?) and SSMS [Here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/ssms/download-sql-server-management-studio-ssms?)              
   - For Data Visualization - Power BI [Download Here](https://apps.microsoft.com/detail/9ntxr16hnw1t?)

### Data Characteristics

The sales dataset includes the following categories:
   - Order ID: Unique identifier for each order made.
   - Customer ID: Unique identifier for each customer.
   - Product: Category of the product.
   - Region: Regions where the transaction occurred (East, West, North, and South).
   - Order Date: Date of transaction (January 2023 to August 2024).
   - Quantity: The number of units of the products purchased in each transaction.
   - Unit Price: The amount for each product quantity.
   - Total Sales: The total amount for each quantity sold.
   - Average Sales: The total average sales.
   - Transaction Category:The category of quantity sold (Low, Medium, High).

The customer dataset includes the following categories:
   - Customer ID: Unique identifier for each customer.
   - Customer Name: Names of all the customers.
   - Region: Regions where the transaction occured (East, West, North, and South).
   - Subscription Type: Different subscription types (Basic, Premium, Standard).
   - Subscription Start: Date of subscription.
   - Subscription End: Date subscription ended
   - Canceled: Category for customers that canceled and the ones that completed the subscription plan.
   - Revenue: Amount each region generated by subscription type.
   - Subscription Duration: The number of days each subscription lasted.

### Basic Statistics about the sales dataset

   - Number of unique customers: 9,923
   - Number of product category: 6
   - Number of Regions involved: 4
   - Total quantity sold: 68,464 items
   - Total sales made: #2,101,180
   - Average sales: 211.78207
   - Transaction category: 3


### Basic Statistics about the customer dataset

   - Number of unique customers: 33,789
   - Count customer names: 20
   - Number of regions involved: 4
   - Subscription types: 3
   - Canceled: True/False
   - Total revenue: #67,542,806
   - Subscription Duration: 365 & 366 days

   
##  Data Cleaning and Preparation
---

   - Checked for blank or missing values: Reviewed the dataset for any blank or missing entries.
   - Removed duplicates: Eliminated duplicate rows/entries to ensure data uniqueness.
   - Data validation: Verified data consistency and accuracy.
   - Data formatting: Ensured consistent formatting throughout the dataset.
   - Created new column:
        1. Total sales
        2. Average sales
        3. Transaction category
   - Calculations:
        1. Performed calculations to derive total sales from provided columns (Quantity and Price):
           
                 =SUM(F:F*G:G)
        3. Calculation to derive the average sales for each product by total sales:
           
                        =Averageif(C:C,C:C,H:H)
        5. Calculation to derive the transaction category:
           
                        =IF(F2<=3,"LOW",IF(F2<=6,"MEDIUM","HIGH"))
                          =IF(F3<=3,"LOW",IF(F3<=6,"MEDIUM","HIGH"))
                          =IF(F4<=3,"LOW",IF(F4<=6,"MEDIUM","HIGH"))
                          =IF(F5<=3,"LOW",IF(F5<=6,"MEDIUM","HIGH"))
   - Removed null columns: Removed the null columns after importing the sales and customer data to power BI in the transformation phase.
   - Checked datatype: Checked the column headers for inconsistent or wrong datatype
   - Created measure: Created measure for the order date in the sales data to know the average sales year Average Sales Year -
     
                    AVERAGE(SalesData[OrderDate].[Year])

## Exploratory Data Analysis
---

Sales Data
1. Retrieve the total sales for each product category.
2. Find the number of sales transactions in each region.
3. Find the highest-selling product by total sales value.
4. Calculate total revenue per product.
5. Calculate monthly sales totals for the current year.
6. Find the top 5 customers by total purchase amount.
7. Calculate the percentage of total sales contributed by each region.
8. Identify products with no sales in the last quarter.

Customer Data
1. Retrieve the total number of customers from each region.
2. Find the most popular subscription type by the number of customers.
3. Find customers who canceled their subscription within 6 months.
4. Calculate the average subscription duration for all customers.
5. Find customers with subscriptions longer than 12 months.
6. Calculate total revenue by subscription type.
7. Find the top 3 regions by subscription cancellations.
8. Find the total number of active and canceled subscriptions.


## Data Analysis
---

These are some of the codes used:

``` SQL
SELECT * FROM [dbo].[LITA CAPSTONE SALES DATA]

SELECT Product, SUM(Quantity * Unitprice) AS [Total Sales]
FROM [dbo].[LITA CAPSTONE SALES DATA]
GROUP BY Product;

SELECT Product, SUM(Quantity * Unitprice) AS [Total Sales]
FROM [dbo].[LITA CAPSTONE SALES DATA]
GROUP BY Product
ORDER BY [Total Sales] DESC;

SELECT TOP 5 CUSTOMER_ID,
SUM(QUANTITY * UNITPRICE) AS [TOTAL PURCHASE AMOUNT]
FROM [dbo].[LITA CAPSTONE SALES DATA]
GROUP BY CUSTOMER_ID
ORDER BY [TOTAL PURCHASE AMOUNT] DESC;

SELECT * FROM [dbo].[LITA CAPSTONE CUSTOMER DATA]

SELECT AVG(DATEDIFF (Day, SubscriptionStart, SubscriptionEnd)) AS [Average Duration]
FROM [dbo].[LITA CAPSTONE CUSTOMER DATA];

SELECT TOP 3 Region,Canceled
FROM [dbo].[LITA CAPSTONE CUSTOMER DATA]

SELECT Canceled, COUNT(CustomerID) AS [Subscriptions]
FROM [dbo].[LITA CAPSTONE CUSTOMER DATA]
GROUP BY Canceled;

SELECT SubscriptionType, SUM(Revenue) AS [Total Revenue]
FROM [dbo].[LITA CAPSTONE CUSTOMER DATA]
GROUP BY SubscriptionType;

```

``` Power BI
Average Sales Year= AVERAGE(SalesData[OrderDate].[Year])
```









